# How to Implement New SDK7 Components

This is the high-level steps that must be followed:

1. Create the protobuf definition in [Decentraland's SDK protocol](https://github.com/decentraland/protocol/tree/main/proto/decentraland/sdk/components)
2. Generate the new protobuf TypeScript code in the [js-sdk-toolchain](https://github.com/decentraland/js-sdk-toolchain) (serialization test + (optional) sdk helpers)
3. Generate the new protobuf C# code in unity-explorer + implement the systems that handle the functionalities, cleanup, etc. for the component
4. (Ideally) Create an example test-scene to show how the component is used from the SDK side

**IMPORTANT** This is the order in which PRs must be merged:

1. Merge Protocol repo PR (if the change was on `main`, then `experimental` must sync the new changes before step 2)
2. Update both `js-sdk-toolchain` repo PR and `unity-explorer` repo PR to use the updated `@dcl/protocol@experimental` package
3. Merge `js-sdk-toolchain` and `unity-explorer` in any order

## 1. Create the protobuf definition in Decentraland's SDK protocol

1. Create the protobuf definition inside https://github.com/decentraland/protocol/tree/main/proto/decentraland/sdk/components
2. Create a PR with the new changes

> **NOTE:** After creating the PR, a GitHub Bot will comment with the package link to test the PR. You can use that link for testing in the following steps.

Things to take into account:

- We are using proto 3, so all the definition of the proto must compile with their [syntax](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/proto3/).
- Be VERY mindful of the fields and types you create in the Protobuf Message, due to retro-compatibility standards we can never rename or modify any field of an already released Protobuf message (AKA if you are still working on your PRs then you can keep changing stuff, although you will be forced to change the other 2 repo PRs as well of course), as that will break scenes that are already deployed and create conflicts in the SDK and Explorer... if at some point we really need to "update" an already released component field, we should create a new field and flag the old one as deprecated ([example](https://github.com/decentraland/protocol/blob/ca94ea2baebb3ebbba6975e668dd5bec8fc96b64/proto/decentraland/sdk/components/animator.proto#L24)).
- We have some common types that cannot be recreated.
- The proto should have the basic definition.
- You must add the following code to enumerate the component with a **UNIQUE** ID:

```protobuf
import "common/id.proto";
option (ecs_component_id) = 1100;
```

> **NOTE:** With the repo cloned locally you can run `make list-components-ids` and `make check-component-id ID=xxx` to make sure your component is using a **unique id**. On Windows you can run this instead: `bash -c "grep -rh 'option (common\.ecs_component_id)' proto/ --include='*.proto' | sed -E 's/.*= ([0-9]+);/\1/' | sort -n | nl"`

**IMPORTANT:** New components going directly to `main` should have a `12xx` ID (or cover the previous unused IDs). New components going to `experimental` should have a `14xx` ID. DAO's Regenesis Labs (AKA Protocol Squad) experimental feature components will have a `16xx` ID. This was defined to avoid ID conflicts when an experimental feature component is taken to `main`.

Example of `.proto`:

```protobuf
syntax = "proto3";

import "common/id.proto";
option (ecs_component_id) = 1020;

message PBAudioSource {
  optional bool playing = 1;
  optional float volume = 2; // default=1.0f
  optional bool loop = 3;
  optional float pitch = 4; // default=1.0f
  string audio_clip_url = 5;
}
```

## 2. Generate the new protobuf TypeScript code in the js-sdk-toolchain

Clone the sdk repo: https://github.com/decentraland/js-sdk-toolchain

Run the following command at the root of the [js-sdk-toolchain](https://github.com/decentraland/js-sdk-toolchain) project (use `@experimental` instead if you are working on an experimental feature):

```bash
npm install @dcl/protocol@next
```

Or the command generated by the GitHub Bot in your `@dcl/protocol` PR (this must be temporal for testing the PRs).

Then run the following commands at the root of the `js-sdk-toolchain` project:

```bash
make install
make build
```

And push the generated code to your branch.

For the branch PR to be approved and functional you will also need to:

- **[Mandatory]** Implement the new component serialization test (check the existent ones at https://github.com/decentraland/js-sdk-toolchain/tree/main/test/ecs/components)
  - Afterwards you will have to run `make update-snapshots` to incorporate the new test into the test memory snapshots.
- **[Optional]** If it was defined that there would be SDK helpers, those also have to be implemented in the PR ([Wiki page for helpers](http://github.com/decentraland/js-sdk-toolchain/wiki/How-to-implement-component-helpers))

After that is done, the GitHub Bot comment in the PR will expose a test package so that you install that in your test scene and be able to use the new component from the SDK in the scene (see [How to connect to a local scene](how-to-connect-to-a-local-scene.md) on setting up a local scene and running it).

### Last-Write-Wins Component (LWW) and GrowOnly-Value-Set Component (GOVS)

In general, any component will be defined by default to be a LWW, so that every update to it through CRDT will overwrite the whole state of it for whoever reads it later. If not specified or needed, always go for a LWW Component approach.

In some cases, specially for some "result components" populated by the Explorer, instead of a LWW, a less-used kind of CRDT component called GrowOnly-Value-Set is needed. That kind of component always holds a collection of all the previous states of the component.

Deeper and more detailed info on those 2 versions of the CRDT components design can be found at the [ADR-117](https://adr.decentraland.org/adr/ADR-117). Here are their main differences:

1. **Last-Write-Wins Component (LWW)**
   - The component can be overwritten and the scene will read only its last state.
2. **GrowOnly-Value-Set Component (GOVS)**
   - This component holds the history of every write in an array (a SDK helper could be useful to implement in order to let the creators avoid the boilerplate. See `videoEvents` or `assetLoad` as reference).

**IMPORTANT**: In order to implement a grow-only-value result component, you will need to list its name inside the file `scripts/protocol-buffer-generation/generateIndex.ts` in the `GROWN_ONLY_COMPONENTS` array.

## 3. Generate the new protobuf C# code in unity-explorer

To generate the C# code from the protobuf files that come from the protocol, go to the [`scripts`](https://github.com/decentraland/unity-explorer/tree/dev/scripts) path in the root of the unity-explorer repository. And execute the following commands:

```bash
npm install
npm run build-protocol
```

To upgrade to the latest version of the `@dcl/protocol`, we should update using:

```bash
npm install @dcl/protocol@experimental
npm run build-protocol
```

> **NOTE:** unity-explorer needs to always use the `@experimental` protocol package to support all the experimental features, otherwise the Unity project won't even compile due to missing component files, etc.

To test a PR, we can use a URL generated by the GitHub Bot in the `@dcl/protocol` PR:

```bash
npm install "https://sdk-team-cdn.decentraland.org/@dcl/protocol/branch//dcl-protocol-1.0.0-3143233696.commit-45f1290.tgz"
npm run build-protocol
```

**IMPORTANT**: After merging a `@dcl/protocol` PR, we must make unity-explorer point to the updated `@dcl/protocol@experimental` package (and NOT the PR test package) before merging the unity-explorer PR.

- If the protocol update happened at [`main`](https://github.com/decentraland/protocol/tree/main) then the `experimental` branch must sync those new changes first, and then update the unity-explorer PR with the latest `@experimental` package.
- If the protocol update happened at [`experimental`](https://github.com/decentraland/protocol/tree/experimental) then the unity-explorer PR can just use the updated `@experimental` package.

### Implement the new component functionalities

After the C# code for the protobuf component was generated, one or more systems have to be implemented to handle its functionality, following the Arch ECS architecture.

- Add the `partial` class corresponding to the new PB component at [IDirtyMarker](https://github.com/decentraland/unity-explorer/blob/dev/Explorer/Assets/DCL/Infrastructure/ProtobufPartialClasses/IDirtyMarker.cs)
- Register the component at the [ComponentsContainer](https://github.com/decentraland/unity-explorer/blob/dev/Explorer/Assets/DCL/Infrastructure/Global/ComponentsContainer.cs), otherwise no system will recognize the component on the ECS entities.

> **NOTE:** You'll see that some special components are registered as "result components". Those are some components designed mainly to be PUT by the Explorer and only READ by the scene (e.g. input result component, raycast result component).

- Create a folder dedicated to the new component at https://github.com/decentraland/unity-explorer/tree/dev/Explorer/Assets/DCL/SDKComponents and implement the handling systems, components, etc. in there.
- Create a PLUGIN file at https://github.com/decentraland/unity-explorer/tree/dev/Explorer/Assets/DCL/PluginSystem/World to INJECT your Systems in that code.
  - Your Plugin has to be instantiated at https://github.com/decentraland/unity-explorer/blob/dev/Explorer/Assets/DCL/Infrastructure/Global/StaticContainer.cs#L254~L280 along with the other Scene Plugins (not GLOBAL).

#### Last-Write-Wins Component (LWW) vs GrowOnly-Value-Set Component (GOVS)

If the Explorer needs to update the component through CRDT for the scene to be able to read its updated values, for LWW components the PUT command is used, but for GOVS components the APPEND command has to be used. Several "result component" systems can be checked as reference, like the [WriteEngineInfoSystem](https://github.com/decentraland/unity-explorer/blob/2a0267f1fcc212ac2dab247d39a5af7fb2a7df32/Explorer/Assets/DCL/Infrastructure/ECS/Unity/EngineInfo/WriteEngineInfoSystem.cs#L36-L44) for LWW and the [VideoEventsSystem](https://github.com/decentraland/unity-explorer/blob/2a0267f1fcc212ac2dab247d39a5af7fb2a7df32/Explorer/Assets/DCL/SDKComponents/MediaStream/Systems/VideoEventsSystem.cs#L55-L66) for GOVS.

#### General implementation guidelines

The following must be implemented:

- Relevant functionalities for the new component
  - Custom non-sdk `struct` components (can be empty) are normally used to change the state of the entity.
  - If `IsDirty` needs to be relied upon, for the case of the scene modifying the component values in runtime and reacting to that: then the `IsDirty` reset handling can either be manual in your systems OR by injecting `ResetDirtyFlagSystem<PBYourComponent>.InjectToWorld(ref builder)` in your Plugin.
- Cleanup of the component
  - SDK component removal
  - Scene unloading (`IFinalizeWorldSystem` implementation)
- Pausing of component functionality if the scene is not current or player leaves/re-enters the scene:
  - Usage of `ISceneStateProvider.IsCurrent` to escape the `Update()` of the system.
  - (more complex and powerful) Usage of `ISceneIsCurrentListener` to listen to the moments the user enters/exits the scene.

#### "Perfect implementation" checks before shipping

Especially for big implementations:

- Systems separation if system is too big
- If using Promises: need `TryGet()` or can just get `Result`?
- Use `ListPool` or `ComponentPool` when possible
- Less "intention" components as possible, try to infer from existence/lack of component on Entity
- Use `UpdateGroup` and Systems Update Order (`UpdateBefore` & `UpdateAfter` attributes)
- Make sure scene feature doesn't run when it's not the current scene
- Test coverage if possible
- Allocations optimization

## 4. Create SDK example test-scene

This step is important because it allows creators (like the Content Team itself) to easily test the new component and know how it should be used, when the official documentation may still be pending.

1. Clone the [sdk7-test-scenes repo](https://github.com/decentraland/sdk7-test-scenes/tree/main)
2. Create your test scene base
   - Duplicate one of the existent test scenes that exist in `/scenes`
   - Change the new folder name to your new test scene coordinates AND name (same format as the rest)
   - Update the `README.md` file
   - Update the `package.json` file -> `"name"` property
   - Update the `scene.json` file -> `"name"` property + `"title"` property + `"base"` and `"parcels"` coordinate properties
3. Go to the root of the repo and run `npm i` and then `npm run check-parcels` to confirm there is no coordinates conflict between your new test scene and a previously existent one (that also updates the `dcl-workspace.json` file)
4. Return to the root of your test scene and install an SDK version that contains the new component, for example if you are still working on an SDK branch with the component, the package is the one exposed in the js-sdk-toolchain PR, like:

```bash
npm install "https://sdk-team-cdn.decentraland.org/@dcl/js-sdk-toolchain/branch/feat/trigger-area-components/dcl-sdk-7.10.1-17412673762.commit-72cc7b1.tgz"
```

   - After that, your IDE should recognize the new component when imported from `'@dcl/sdk/ecs'` and you should be able to use it in your code without compilation errors.
   - **NOTE:** If the change you did to the protocol/sdk involves changing the API for global functions you may need to use the `--save` parameter when installing the test package like: `npm install --save "https://sdk-team-cdn.decentraland.org/@dcl/js-sdk-toolchain/branch/feat/move-player-to-duration-field/dcl-sdk-7.17.1-20757258908.commit-16f1a78.tgz"`

5. Run your scene to confirm there are no compilation errors (`npm run start -- --explorer-alpha`)
6. Code your test scene making use of the new component (`index.ts` and whatever extra scripts you need)
7. Make sure to remove unneeded files like `/models`, etc. if your scene doesn't use them (`/images/scene-thumbnail.png` must be kept)
8. Create a branch in the test scenes repo and push your new scene to create the corresponding PR in that repo, you are responsible for merging it
